One of the earliest works, separate, you know, the pamphlet works about libraries in this country, I can't remember the exact title and date, but it was around 1831.
It was published in Andover, Massachusetts.
But for, you know, it's extraordinary.
There's no copies here at Harvard.
There were only two copies recorded in NUC, one at the Huntington Library and one at Knox College.
Knox College.
Now, they tried to get it on interlibrary loan from Knox College, which are interlibrary loan people here, and it was clear that the Knox College copy had been discarded.
Why should they keep it, in a sense?
But that meant that, you know, there was only one copy left.
And it could very easily have been that there were no copies left.
Because books end up in strange places.
And, you know, this book would have totally disappeared because of it.
If it weren't for the Huntington Library.
Can you find the title?
I can find the title.
I like that.
That's exactly the kind of thing I'm talking about.
You know, and Nick Baker out in San Francisco, you know, he found a couple of books.
I've read his New Yorker article.
Checked it out.
These books, you know, aren't really, because you check OCLC and stuff and you see who has copies of various books.
You know, you're down a half a dozen, five copies.
It's happening more often than that.
The British Library, they will say, last copy.
You know, they clearly identify a book as a last
copy of a book last you know we're getting to that aren't we but as you know I mean we know also that that books you know books are not just text books have all kinds of of other you know stuff with them
that in a sense tells you how to read the book, isn't it?
That's right.
It tells you what you're going to get in that book, how to read the book, and, you know, so, you know, maybe, you know, they don't know that that copy, you know, that that last copy, that copy in that institution has the original body.
They do that.
They can't, there's no way they can tell that without, without,
without writing.
But there's an even more serious issue, I think, involved in this.
The recon that is taking place is based on the idea of a hit.
And
And Recon being short for what?
Retrospective conversion.
Retrospective conversion of card catalog, about which Nicholson Baker also wrote.
So hit meaning?
Sometimes we go in and access the file or whatever.
No, a hit in Recon would be, you know, if you have a given book and you find a record for it,
in the OCLC database, that's a hit, and then that record in OCLC gets added to your file and becomes part of your catalog.
And you and I would think that a hit would have to be exact.
In other words, that if you have, you know,
a work by let's say Harriet Beecher Stone if you have her Uncle Tom's Cabin with a date of 1869 that a hit would only be a record in OCLC that had the date 1869 and the same publisher and there was a true match
It's not the first edition, though.
Well, no, it definitely isn't the first edition.
But somebody might think, what difference does it make?
We have Barry and Peter Stowe, I guess.
But a hit is not being defined as that exact match.
A hit might be anything within a...
I think it varies from library to library what the criteria are.
It could be within two years of that date.
If you think that that other institution has a copy of that book, you might be wrong.
They might not have that book because their bibliographical file was in a sense corrupted by the
the definition of hit.
It's a complicated story.
No, I like it.
It's something to pursue, isn't it?
Yeah.
Who do you think I should talk to about something like that?
Who would be eloquent on that?
I haven't talked to anybody at OCLC yet.
Maybe I should do that at some point.
Well, as a matter of fact, that would be a fascinating part of your story, you know, really, because it's a great, you know, it's a great, you know,
Anybody in particular?
I don't know anyone there.
I think so, because it is, you know, it's happening.
It's a part of your story.
It really is.
And so, for a variety of reasons, you can't be sure that another institution has that book, and we
has that book specifically that you're, I mean, it may have, you know, I assume we're talking Stowe, you know, Uncle Tom, 1869.
Well, yeah, they might have.
They might have.
They might have Uncle Tom's Cabin from 1908.
But maybe you're interested in that 1851 or 1852 or whatever year that it came out for various reasons.
And as you point out, a book is more than just a text.
And then there's, you know, bibliographers, of course, are keenly aware that copies of books vary in all kinds of ways.
And that, you know, so that in destroying books, you're destroying some evidence that could be immensely useful.
I'm hoping to do a chapter on bibliography again, but in something that the general reader, my reader, is more than Mr. General Reader, but anecdotally, we were very interesting.
Father Boyle at the Vatican Library, I mean, they engage in a 200, 300-year project of a finest.
They expect that that's how long it's going to take to do everything.
It's fascinating.
It's just on the very basis of business.
Sure.
You know, why?
Why is this important?
This Carol Fitzgerald that I wrote about in Gibrio that John Cole worked with at the Rivers of America, you know, she's, that's going to be another story.
Audrey Hahnemann's work with the Hemingway, Gibrio, Michael Winship's work with the BAL and other things, you know.
Very interesting.
Yes, it is.
The Mass Historical Society and the Adams family thing is quite an interesting story.
That's going well into the next century.
It goes on and on and on.
Why?
Why is it necessary?
I don't know.
Take the story wherever it goes.
Want to go have a salad in the basement of the faculty club?
That sounds terrific.
It's where, you know,
before they go to process it.
But these are books that have been selected for self-control.
For self-control, yeah.
How does that other depository figure into the mix, the one that you did?
Yeah.
That was a real source of confusion with people.
Those books have all been, most of them anyway, I think, have been moved up to the Harvard Depository because the
So you're kind of withdrawing from that consortium, I guess?
Well, I think that's a complicated consortium.
I really don't understand.
Now, these aren't books that are going to South Florida.
These are just going for a part of Widener.
No, some of these will go, but we're just going for a part of Widener.
When you find, you know, empty shelves, safe on the shelves, it tends to mean I've, you know, been there.
So, you said—I forget the precise number, but it was like a hundred thousand or so.
Yeah.
They are made title by title, even though they go into the thousands.
That's right, but it's because it can be done very quickly, actually.
If you're there, out in the stack, and you see two shelves of translations of milk,
I mean, in a sense, I'm not making that, you know, looking at each one of those translations and making a decision.
I'm simply making the decision that we don't need to have in here, in Widener, translations of Milton so that we can send them out.
Or if you have six copies of a, six editions of a book, I'll look at them and choose, you know,
which one or ones I figure need to stay and wind there, and then send the others out.
So how much of your work week would you say you commit to this?
Well, I'm theoretically half-time doing that, and half-time editing the Harvard Library Bulletin.
But this is a primary duty, as we used to say it there.
I decided not to neglect it.
And let the bulletin, if anything, slide a bit.
Yeah.
Which, unfortunately, it does.
It's a wonderful magazine, though.
Well, we need this waiting.
That's good.
My wife will be happy.
We get a little more than this.
Yeah.
Until after we've had none.
That's right.
Okay.
All throughout the country, I was going to say particularly the Northeast, but I think all throughout the country, because this is a decentralized country, we don't have, it's not like France, not like England.
All over, there are these small public libraries that have wonderful things.
I went in, for instance, to the Somerville Public Library and went into their local history room, and there sitting on the shelves to which anyone could go, I thought it was anyone, you know, they didn't know me, was the records of a social library that had been founded in
in 1820 or thereabouts.
Manuscript, you know, list of members and so on.
I could have walked off with it.
And indeed, it's happening all over the country that people are walking off with it, that they're being lost.
So that there's a, you know, we tend to think that in the large libraries we have
everything, but there's all kinds of stuff that we don't have at all that is out in other smaller institutions because of the decentralized nature of this country.
So it's a problem, and I don't see anyone, you know, thinking about it.
To me, the Concord Public Library, I think I'll write about that.
I love that library.
small-town library.
It's beautiful.
It's got a tradition here.
As recently as the 1960s, you know, they had Emerson as those.
These are their own annotated books who are in general circulation.
And, in fact, I think that is how Emerson's copy of Walden
It was all set to be sold at auction, and then somebody determined that it actually belongs to the Concord Public Library.
And I think it was the Concord Public Library that Bob Gross tells a story.
Do you know Bob Gross?
He's head of the program for the history of the book out at the Antiquarian Society.
teaches down in Virginia, and has written about Conford.
And he found that, and I think it was Conford, that had a set of the newspaper published in law in the 19th century.
And he said that they got rid of it.
Yeah, and apparently what they didn't realize was that they had it because Lowell, that newspaper, was the newspaper for the county of which Concord was a part.
Well, I grew up in Lowell, and Concord's only eight miles away, so it's not that bad.
Yeah.
Sure.
Yeah, and, but, you know,
they saw it as not relevant to Concord because it was law.
And I think he says they had the only complete set.
Wow.
Has he published this?
I just did a piece on the AAS history of the book that I didn't talk about.
I talked to Ed Charles.
I sat in a couple of their seminars this summer.
I do a call up to this Biblio magazine, and this next one coming up is on that very project.
I think I'll give him a call.
In fact, I'm going down to UVA in October.
I'm getting a sign to Terry Bell.
He's not at UVA.
He's at the college down there.
What's it?
William & Mary.
Oh, he's at William & Mary.
I've met a fellow from William & Mary, but I think he's the librarian.
at the Manuscript Society.
Then you were teaching the history of libraries.
At the University of Rhode Island Studgeon Program in Boston.
I had
the students do an assignment that they had to find a document relating to the history of libraries and make a presentation and give me a ten-page paper about it.
And they brought in all kinds of documents.
from their local institutions, sometimes, you know, manuscripts that obviously were not accessible to me here in the Harvard Library.
And so it just, you know, confirmed the sense of mine about the riches that are in local institutions
many of which actually throw away their stuff related to their own history.
That's absolutely amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
I wonder if the AAS had that newspaper, that Lowell newspaper.
If AAS doesn't have it, then the chances are good that that will be gone.
That's now a void, isn't it?
That's right.
That's a vacuum right there.
It's a possibility.
Who else would have it?
So when you teach the history of libraries, is it strictly American or is it libraries?
You start in antiquity?
I did cover antiquity, but...
and I I also tried to paint a picture of European libraries of the 16th and 17th and 18th centuries because I wanted to contrast that with American libraries.
Why those three centuries in particular?
Because it's in the 18th century that American libraries really got going with
Benjamin Franklin.
And I guess, you know, we had some, you know, obviously there was a Harvard library, you know, back before then, but it was pretty small potatoes.
And there was Yale started at the 18th century.
It was pretty small potatoes up until 100 years ago.
That's right.
Exactly.
You look at Farnham's survey of libraries,
In the top five, I mean, he has the Athenaeum in there, he has the Library Company in Philadelphia, Library of Congress, Harvard, and I forget what the fifth one is, but, you know, I mean, where you have two private reading, you know, the Athenaeum and the Library Company are among the largest, and you're talking 200,000 bargains.
That's right.
Very small.
So it was very, very small.
Yeah.
And so I wanted to contrast that with, you know,
some of these large European libraries, you know, and just convey to the students that this was a poor country, you know.
And I used to go
I've been in European bookshops, walls lined with early books, fine bindings.
You can't possibly find a room like that for American books, can you?
You know, you get a few here and a few there, but we don't have that kind of richness.
And yet, you know, we ultimately, of course, came to have great libraries.
But it wasn't an organic process.
No, it was explosive almost.
Richard Landon up at the University of Toronto told me that it was extraordinary.
And at the University of Toronto when he went through.
when York University was founded in the 60s, I guess, up in Toronto.
The way they... To build a library, that's interesting to me.
When you have a new institution, how do they get books?
What do they do?
They came down here to Cambridge and they bought out Scar Bookstore.
This is a university.
Everything.
And then they also went to a bookstore in Montreal and claimed him out.
And that was their startup library at this university.
Yeah, interesting.
And I'm going to try and document that.
It's one thing to say, and it's another thing to make sure it's going to happen that way.
But what does that, you know, there was a page one story in the New York Times a couple of weeks ago about that...
The Olin Foundation is going to establish a new college here outside of Boston.
Right.
What are they going to do for a library?
Where are they going to get their books?
But isn't that an engineering school?
Yeah.
Are they coming up here because they're close to MIT and they're close to Harvard, or is it strictly going to be what you can get off the Internet?
I wonder.
I bet it's going to be essentially what you get off the Internet.
And for the sciences, libraries become increasingly less relevant.
That's the way it's going.
We've got college in Monterey.
You know, this is amazing.
That's another thing I'm going to do.
I'm going to go out to California for a week next month because I want to go out of Monterey.
Remember that big thing?
They opened up the new school in Fort Ord, where Fort Ord used to be.
It's part of the...
California State System of the University of California.
And there wasn't even a library in the plans.
You know, then it was pointed out to them, you know, they didn't have a library, so they did something, and they do have a few books there now, but it was a technical engineering kind of a school.
But books were largely deemed irrelevant to what this place was going to do.
You're finding that, and that's why it's more than a curiosity that as you open these new buildings, like at the University of Michigan, it's not called a library.
Yeah.
It's called an information resources center.
But it seems to me that the whole resonance of library is more than a place where you sell books.
I think you would probably agree with that yourself.
Am I right or am I right?
Yeah, sure.
There is a story to a writer.
That's right.
And it really bothers me when I see that the whole concept of the library is being treated in such a cavalier fashion.
And this is something I want to address.
So when I talk to somebody like Alberto Echo or Maurice Sendak or Stephen Jay Gould, you know, I mean, what is a librarian?
You know, George Bernard Shaw, everything he knew he learned in the British Library.
Virginia Woolf was totally the product of the reading.
He never had any education outside of the home.
He read her father's books.
And Karl Marx.
And Karl Marx, you know, developed his manifesto in the British Library.
Did they tell you over in the British Library the story about Karl Marx?
No.
Apparently, the story as I hear it, as I recall it, is that he used to come in every day and take the same seat in the British Library.
And years after he was dead, someone came in and asked an elderly woman who clearly would have been in the British Library at his time,
and asked her, do you remember the man who used to sit at that table?
He said, yeah, I do.
He went away one day, and no one ever heard of him since.
Where did you get that story?
I don't know.
But ask them in the British Library.
Well, even if it's apocryphal, it's wonderful.
I mean, I have no problem leaving apocryphal.
How did you identify it?
There was a thing on C-SPAN yesterday morning.
People don't understand how the decision process works.
And one of those who didn't understand was a member of the library committee who...
who was a computer expert.
He teaches computer sciences here.
And he had developed an algorithm for choosing what books aren't used and should go out to the depository.
And so he wanted to come in and see how I did it.
So we went into the stacks and we worked about half an hour.
And then he said, oh, you do it better than I can.
because you take into account many more factors than I'm able to put into this algorithm, and you do it on the basis of information that is just not available to me, like the finding and the condition of the book, and the size, and so on.
Do you have this in the thing that you're going to send me?
No, I don't.
You mentioned this?
No.
It's so important, isn't it?
Yeah.
Now, this happened more recently.
Yeah, but this is where you have to be a book person.
Yeah.
And that's pretty important.
It's not really important, it's essential.
There has just been published in English translation a book called Paratext by...
Jeannette, French author.
And what it is, Paratext is about all of those elements that are extra textual, that convey information about the book.
Paratext.
Yeah.
And P-A-R-A?
And it's precisely that kind of information that...
that I'm processing when I'm out in the stack.
It's not, you know, you might think that I'm looking at text, but in a sense I'm looking at the paratext, because that tells me whether the book is a candidate.
Yeah, sure, if you don't mind.
This is the HD Transfer and Linkage Office, if that comes to it.
It was kind of like a processing.
Well, linkage has to do with—it's something that—it's some other process.
It doesn't really have to do with HDH.
It's just that the same people are doing this.
But these are truckloads of books.
This is a truck.
Economics of Agriculture Production.
Beef cattle, land use, part-time farming.
And these look like they're pretty old, too, on top of all that.
You know, these aren't exactly the kinds of things that somebody's going to be looking for.
No, I don't think so.
This afternoon.
So they're going to go out there.
And then they will be putting boxes out there and...
store according to size.
Now, you give it its barcode here, right?
That's right.
Exactly.
And these came someplace out of Widener?
Yes.
And what will go into the shelf space that they have vacated here?
Is that to be determined?
Well, we have to send out enough so that we can begin to get large chunks of
of empty shelves.
It can't be one of two titles.
It has to be... That's right.
And then once we can get large chunks, then we can begin to reorganize the stacks in a way that makes more sense.
For about a decade, all of the moves in the stacks had to do with how we could squeeze in more books.
And there was someone who was very good at that.
Managed to squeeze in an awful lot of books.
Oh, my name is Charlie Montabano.
So we need to get a fair chunk of space.
So it's squeezing in individual books.
It's making room for collections on a systematic basis.
Yeah, and we need to have more room for the new books.
And books are coming in.
They continue to come in at an astonishing rate.
I mean, I read the annual reports.
You read the annual reports, yeah.
They've got to go someplace.
Exactly.
All of these trucks, I see about a half a dozen trucks, and this represents, what, a day's selection?
Well, it takes me, you know, about an hour and a half to fill up the truck.
Now, I've been on vacation, and these trucks actually, there were a couple here that weren't filled up by me.
This one, for instance, was
This has to do with some, you know, I guess Ukrainian literature.
And it's actually published in Moscow.
So maybe it's Russian.
But it's all Russian.
It's Cyrillic in any case.
And there's a graduate student in Slovakia.
We've been going through the stats and selecting in this particular area, but following guidelines that have been developed.
What we do in literature is that when I first started out, I would go to encyclopedias and draw up a list of authors who were important.
And then it dawned on me one day that what I was doing was really reinforcing the canon, and that I was shaping scholarship, but shaping it in a very traditional and conservative way.
And so what I needed to do was to, you know, how else could I do it?
Oh, did that concern you, that you were reinforcing the canon?
Yeah.
Why?
Well, my wife's a feminist scholar.
Your wife's name is?
Mary Carpenter.
And, you know, he was a daughter getting a Ph.D.
in French literature who was working on French women authors of the 19th century that she'd found in the stats that you would not find mentioned in any encyclopedia.
And so it really was, you know, reinforcing...
I was preventing any possibility of, or virtually any possibility of discovery of new authors of importance.
And that's always been a part of the process of scholarship.
And so you're mindful of these things as you go through your journey.
Oh, yeah.
So this was one of those epiphanies while you were in there.
That's right.
So what happened?
Well...
to do, what to do.
Finally, it occurred to me that even these canonical authors often were on the shelves with lots of their books unused or with editions of the books unused and so on, so that instead of bypassing those, I should send out some of the books of those people who are not going to be forgotten.
You can get it back from the depository.
And also keep on the shelves some
at least one book of every single author.
Interesting.
And that's the way we do it now.
Every author.
Can you give me some specific examples?
Well, I mean, it's precisely because I don't know these people's names, you know, but this student, when she went through, would have kept on the shelf, you know, here's Mikhailo Sabchenko.
Mm-hmm.
She would have kept some book of Mikhailo Sovchenko on the shelves of Widener, even though no one may.
But you're talking about the canon in general, and you're talking about reinforcing the canon.
You're talking about not just Western or Ukrainian literature.
all of the different canons, I think.
That's right.
And, I mean, so we're now following the same policies, you know, in Danish literature.
I mean, you mentioned Harriet Beecher Stowe earlier, so you keep up the top schedule, but her first book, I think, was a geography text.
That might go out to herself, if you had it.
Exactly.
That would be the kind of thing I think you're talking about.
You mentioned the Danish.
Well, I mean, we now follow this policy with Danish and with, you know, Finnish and Latvian and Estonian and the whole world.
Fascinating.
There really is, because I am interested in this whole aspect of the Canada, and you say how you are really influencing the pursuit of scholarship.
Yeah.
in a real way, because if stuff isn't here to be discovered, then it won't be.
That's right.
So you have to know what exists in self for the ask part.
Is that right?
You have to know what exists.
And so, you know, I try to send out, you know, you want to send out low-use stuff, too, but you want to send out low-use stuff that can be found.
And so if a book has a highly descriptive title, it'll be more likely to go out to Southboro than a book that doesn't have a highly descriptive title.
Again, this is part of the criteria?
Yeah.
I mean, you put that in there.
Yes, yes.
And then there's stuff that I keep simply because, and I don't know if this is in there, but it'll be stuff that I keep simply because
I think that if I send this material out that it won't be used.
For instance, anthologies, American anthologies, I keep them here because I think that people might want to use anthologies, look at a whole batch of them in order to see, well, you know, what was the taste in 1880?
But you want to compare it, don't you?
That's the only way it becomes meaningful.
So I just think that if I don't use judgment in those ways, I'll be cutting off opportunities for the scholarship.
That's really interesting.
Yeah, it makes it fun, doesn't it?
Very, very useful to me, really.
Excellent.
So this is the room D-N91.
Where are we in there?
What floor are we on?
Well, we're in the basement.
I see.
There are no basement levels beneath us?
There are none beneath us.
As other kinds of space got used up, you know, more and more of the
bathroom operations got moved down here, like conservation, and processing books for stories, microfilming, scanning, you know, the refrigerated things that might have gotten wet or something.
Exactly.
This is great.
Thank you.
This is the kind of thing I'm so excited about.
I'll be transcribing it when I get home, you know.
You see, the reason why I had the chutzpah to say I can solve the problem is because I've always spent a lot of time in the stacks.
I'd come in, you know, Saturday, and I'd been working on, you know, I'd work on some bibliographical projects,
And I'd get distracted and I'd go wandering down aisles of books so that I knew in a way that other people didn't that there was a lot of stuff here that we did not have to keep here.
And this wasn't just, you know, dreamed up, you know, of a moment.
I knew because of having wandered down those stacks
that we could do it.
And the greater the library, the easier it is to do, isn't it?
Because you have, you know, soil conservation from 1920s, and you have, you know, two shelves of translations of Milton, and you have every collected edition of Shakespeare, and so on.
So in a way, it's easier in the Harvard Library.
than it is in many other libraries to do this kind of work.
Excellent.
I'd like to try to convey the extent to which a great library is a truly international collection of what was
that you can study the cultures of the world in this book.
And you can't say that about many libraries.
You can't say it about many.
You can go from the Caucasus in Armenia to ancient Greece to modern Greece to Lithuania, et cetera, et cetera.
And that's
the kind of thing that I think I'd like to try to convey to you in a tour if I've got the chance.
Are you planning to be around?
No big trips planned or anything?
No.